README.md, before:

# Chennaipy-video-helpers

This repository contains helper scripts and commands to create meetup videos for [Chennaipy](http://chennaipy.org).

## Steps

* Install `ffmpeg`, `sox`, `imagemagick`, `ghostscript`
    * On OSX, you can directly use brew for the above:

            $ brew install ffmpeg sox imagemagick ghostscript

    * On Ubuntu, installing [ffmpeg is a bit tricky](http://blog.pkh.me/p/13-the-ffmpeg-libav-situation.html), but these commands should get you started:

            $ sudo add-apt-repository ppa:mc3man/trusty-media
            $ sudo apt-get update
            $ sudo apt-get dist-upgrade
            $ sudo apt-get install ffmpeg imagemagick ghostscript sox

        You can read more about the ffmpeg ppa [here](https://launchpad.net/~mc3man/+archive/ubuntu/trusty-media)
    * On Windows, you can individually download and install prebuilt binaries for the packages:
        * [ffmpeg](http://ffmpeg.zeranoe.com/builds/), 64-bit static should do
        * [sox](http://sourceforge.net/projects/sox/files/sox/)
        * [imagemagick](http://www.imagemagick.org/script/binary-releases.php#windows)
        * [ghostscript](http://www.ghostscript.com/download/gsdnld.html)
        * you might have to manually add them to `PATH` if not done automatically.

* Convert the audio to a wav (wav files are faster to process, and easier to manipulate using sox)

        $ ffmpeg -i bigdata_audio.m4a audio.wav

* Remove noise from audio

        $ sox audio.wav -n trim 0 1.5 noiseprof noise.profile
        $ sox audio.wav cleaned.wav noisered noise.profile 0

* Convert the pdf to individual images using

        $ convert -density 150 -resize 1920x1080 bigbigdata.pdf individual_images/%d.png

* Notedown timestamps from audio at which slide is to be changed

* Generate segments of video for those times

        $ python create_video_segments.py individual_images\ individual_video\ 00:02 00:40 1:25 2:10 3:35 3:50 5:30 7:22 7:42 8:02 10:03 12:10 13:10 15:12 16:00 17:25 18:30 20:00 21:18 21:23

* Trim the audio if required

        $ sox cleaned.wav final.wav trim 00:02 =21:20

* Trim the video if required

        $ ffmpeg -ss <start_time_in_hh:mm:sec> -i <input_video_name>  -t <time_duration_in_hh:mm:sec> <output_video_name>

* Generate a `concatvideos` file to be used by ffmpeg to join the videos to form a single one

        $ generate_concatvideos.py individual_video\

* Run the ffmpeg script to create the joined video

        $ ffmpeg -f concat -i concatvideos -c copy joined.mp4

* Join the generated video with the final audio

        $ ffmpeg -i joined.mp4 -i final.wav -shortest -preset ultrafast -q 0 final.mp4

* Managing volume in the video

        $ ffmpeg -i <input_video_name> -af 'volume=2.5<or 1x>' -preset ultrafast <output_video_name>

* scale video to 16:9

        $ ffmpeg -i final.mp4 -vf pad="ih*16/9:ih:(ow-iw)/2:(oh-ih)/2" -preset ultrafast -acodec copy final2.mp4

    or specify absolute pixels

        $ ffmpeg -i <input_video_name> -vf "scale=<specify_width_in_px:specify_length_in_px>" -preset ultrafast <output_video_name>

* Generate the title image

        $ sed -e 's/%title%/My Python Experience/g' -e 's/%speaker%/Shrikant Giridhar/g' -e 's/%month%/Feb/g' title-template.svg > title.svg

* convert the svg to a png

        $ convert title.svg -density 150 -resize 1920x1080 title.png

* create title video with empty audio

        $ ffmpeg -loop 1 -i title.png -ar 44100 -acodec pcm_s16le -f s16le -ac 2 -i /dev/zero -acodec libfdk_aac -ab 128k -map 0:0 -map 1:0 -t 7 -preset ultrafast -qp 0 title.mp4

* create the uploadable version

        $ ffmpeg -i title.mp4 -i final2.mp4 -filter_complex "[0:0] [0:1] [1:0] [1:1] concat=n=2:v=1:a=1 [v] [a]" -map "[v]" -map "[a]" -preset ultrafast uploadable.mp4

Commit message:

added p.s note regarding ultrafast processing

README.md, after:

# Chennaipy-video-helpers

This repository contains helper scripts and commands to create meetup videos for [Chennaipy](http://chennaipy.org).

## Steps

* Install `ffmpeg`, `sox`, `imagemagick`, `ghostscript`
    * On OSX, you can directly use brew for the above:

            $ brew install ffmpeg sox imagemagick ghostscript

    * On Ubuntu, installing [ffmpeg is a bit tricky](http://blog.pkh.me/p/13-the-ffmpeg-libav-situation.html), but these commands should get you started:

            $ sudo add-apt-repository ppa:mc3man/trusty-media
            $ sudo apt-get update
            $ sudo apt-get dist-upgrade
            $ sudo apt-get install ffmpeg imagemagick ghostscript sox

        You can read more about the ffmpeg ppa [here](https://launchpad.net/~mc3man/+archive/ubuntu/trusty-media)
    * On Windows, you can individually download and install prebuilt binaries for the packages:
        * [ffmpeg](http://ffmpeg.zeranoe.com/builds/), 64-bit static should do
        * [sox](http://sourceforge.net/projects/sox/files/sox/)
        * [imagemagick](http://www.imagemagick.org/script/binary-releases.php#windows)
        * [ghostscript](http://www.ghostscript.com/download/gsdnld.html)
        * you might have to manually add them to `PATH` if not done automatically.

* Convert the audio to a wav (wav files are faster to process, and easier to manipulate using sox)

        $ ffmpeg -i bigdata_audio.m4a audio.wav

* Remove noise from audio

        $ sox audio.wav -n trim 0 1.5 noiseprof noise.profile
        $ sox audio.wav cleaned.wav noisered noise.profile 0

* Convert the pdf to individual images using

        $ convert -density 150 -resize 1920x1080 bigbigdata.pdf individual_images/%d.png

* Notedown timestamps from audio at which slide is to be changed

* Generate segments of video for those times

        $ python create_video_segments.py individual_images\ individual_video\ 00:02 00:40 1:25 2:10 3:35 3:50 5:30 7:22 7:42 8:02 10:03 12:10 13:10 15:12 16:00 17:25 18:30 20:00 21:18 21:23

* Trim the audio if required

        $ sox cleaned.wav final.wav trim 00:02 =21:20

* Trim the video if required

        $ ffmpeg -ss <start_time_in_hh:mm:sec> -i <input_video_name>  -t <time_duration_in_hh:mm:sec> <output_video_name>

* Generate a `concatvideos` file to be used by ffmpeg to join the videos to form a single one

        $ generate_concatvideos.py individual_video\

* Run the ffmpeg script to create the joined video

        $ ffmpeg -f concat -i concatvideos -c copy joined.mp4

* Join the generated video with the final audio

        $ ffmpeg -i joined.mp4 -i final.wav -shortest -preset ultrafast -q 0 final.mp4

* Managing volume in the video

        $ ffmpeg -i <input_video_name> -af 'volume=2.5<or 1x>' -preset ultrafast <output_video_name>

* scale video to 16:9

        $ ffmpeg -i final.mp4 -vf pad="ih*16/9:ih:(ow-iw)/2:(oh-ih)/2" -preset ultrafast -acodec copy final2.mp4

    or specify absolute pixels

        $ ffmpeg -i <input_video_name> -vf "scale=<specify_width_in_px:specify_length_in_px>" -preset ultrafast <output_video_name>

* Generate the title image

        $ sed -e 's/%title%/My Python Experience/g' -e 's/%speaker%/Shrikant Giridhar/g' -e 's/%month%/Feb/g' title-template.svg > title.svg

* convert the svg to a png

        $ convert title.svg -density 150 -resize 1920x1080 title.png

* create title video with empty audio

        $ ffmpeg -loop 1 -i title.png -ar 44100 -acodec pcm_s16le -f s16le -ac 2 -i /dev/zero -acodec libfdk_aac -ab 128k -map 0:0 -map 1:0 -t 7 -preset ultrafast -qp 0 title.mp4

* create the uploadable version

        $ ffmpeg -i title.mp4 -i final2.mp4 -filter_complex "[0:0] [0:1] [1:0] [1:1] concat=n=2:v=1:a=1 [v] [a]" -map "[v]" -map "[a]"  uploadable.mp4

    P.S: if you aren't worried about file size & want to avoid 100% cpu core utilization, you can add `-preset ultrafast` to speed up the processing
